Firmware Status Provider Development Roadmap

Repository: https://github.com/Thebestbmxer/Router-PI-Assistant

This roadmap defines the next development phase of the project: separating firmware-specific router communication from the generic management layer while keeping the existing application architecture clean and extensible.

The repository already uses a src/ package layout, system packaging, systemd integration, and a growing router communication/test suite.
1. Establish the Provider Architecture

Create the firmware-specific backend boundary:

src/router_controller/router_comms/
└── firmware_status_providers/
    ├── __init__.py
    ├── base.py
    ├── openwrt.py
    ├── ddwrt.py
    └── netgear.py

The purpose of this package is to contain only firmware-specific communication and interpretation logic.

The rest of the application must not need to know whether a router runs OpenWrt, DD-WRT, Netgear firmware, or another supported firmware.

The provider layer will be responsible for translating firmware-specific command output into the application's common status models.
2. Define the Provider Interface

Create an abstract/common provider contract in:

firmware_status_providers/base.py

The interface should define the operations required by the application without containing firmware-specific implementation.

The initial interface should support retrieval of:

    System status
    Memory status
    Disk/storage status
    Temperature status

The interface should operate against the existing authenticated SSH connection rather than creating its own SSH connection.

Conceptually:

SSH Connection
      │
      ▼
Firmware Status Provider
      │
      ▼
Common Status Models
      │
      ▼
Web Application

This keeps SSH transport, firmware interpretation, and presentation separate.
3. Use the Existing Status Models as the Application Contract

The renamed models are now the canonical representation of router information.

Examples include:

SystemStatus
MemoryStatus

Additional models should be introduced only where the information represents a genuinely separate domain.

The models should describe what the router reports, not how a particular firmware reports it.

For example:

SystemStatus
├── hostname
├── model
├── architecture
├── target_platform
├── firmware_version
├── kernel_version
├── local_time
├── uptime
└── load_average

And:

MemoryStatus
├── total
├── available
├── used
├── cached
├── swap_free
├── disk_space
└── temp_space

The exact existing field names should be preserved where they have already been established rather than unnecessarily redesigning the models.
4. Implement the OpenWrt Provider First

OpenWrt is the primary firmware target and should become the reference implementation.

Create:

firmware_status_providers/openwrt.py

The provider should collect the required information through read-only SSH commands available on OpenWrt.

The implementation should:

    Execute commands through the existing connection abstraction.
    Parse command output internally.
    Convert the results into SystemStatus and MemoryStatus.
    Never expose raw command output to the web layer.
    Gracefully handle missing optional information.
    Raise well-defined application exceptions when required information cannot be obtained.

The OpenWrt provider becomes the standard against which subsequent firmware providers are designed.
5. Build Provider Detection

The application needs to determine which provider should manage a connected router.

Provider detection should use information already available from the router rather than relying solely on the hardware manufacturer.

The detection sequence should be approximately:

Connect
   │
   ▼
Identify firmware/platform
   │
   ├── OpenWrt → OpenWrtProvider
   ├── DD-WRT → DDWRTProvider
   ├── Netgear → NetgearProvider
   └── Unknown → Generic/Unsupported Provider

Detection should be isolated from individual providers.

Do not scatter firmware checks throughout the application.
6. Create a Provider Registry

Introduce a small registry/factory responsible for selecting providers.

Conceptually:

ProviderRegistry
       │
       ├── OpenWrtProvider
       ├── DDWRTProvider
       ├── NetgearProvider
       └── ...

The rest of the application should request:

provider = provider_registry.get(router)

rather than importing a specific firmware implementation.

This allows additional firmware support to be added without modifying the status page or core router management code.
7. Connect Providers to the Existing Router Object

The Router object should eventually have access to its selected firmware provider.

The relationship should remain:

Router
 ├── Identity
 ├── Candidate
 ├── State
 ├── ConnectionManager
 └── FirmwareStatusProvider

The provider should not replace RouterConnectionManager.

The connection manager remains responsible for SSH connectivity.

The provider remains responsible for understanding the connected firmware.
8. Implement the Status Service Layer

Add an application-facing service between the web routes and firmware providers.

For example:

router_comms/
    status_service.py

Its purpose is to provide a clean interface such as:

get_system_status()
get_memory_status()

The web application should communicate with this service rather than directly invoking OpenWrt commands.

The resulting architecture becomes:

Web Route
    │
    ▼
Status Service
    │
    ▼
Firmware Provider
    │
    ▼
Connection Manager
    │
    ▼
SSH
    │
    ▼
Router

This separation is important before additional firmware implementations are introduced.
9. Complete the Status Page

The existing status page should consume the common status models.

The first version should display:
System

    Hostname
    Model
    Architecture
    Target platform
    Firmware version
    Kernel version
    Local time
    Uptime
    Load average

Memory / Storage

    Total memory
    Available memory
    Used memory
    Cached memory
    Free swap
    Disk space
    Temporary filesystem space

The page should not contain firmware-specific parsing logic.
10. Add Status Page Error States

The status page should explicitly distinguish between:

    Router disconnected
    SSH connection unavailable
    Firmware not recognized
    Provider unavailable
    Command failed
    Individual metric unavailable

A failure retrieving one optional metric should not necessarily make the entire status page unusable.

For example:

Hostname       router
Model          WNR1000v2
Firmware       Unknown
Kernel         4.x.x
Temperature    Unavailable

is preferable to failing the entire request.
11. Add OpenWrt Provider Tests

Create tests specifically for the provider layer:

tests/router_comms/firmware_status_providers/
├── test_openwrt.py
├── test_base.py
└── ...

Tests should verify:

    Correct commands are executed.
    Representative OpenWrt output is parsed correctly.
    Malformed output is handled safely.
    Missing values are handled correctly.
    SSH command failures are translated appropriately.
    Returned objects are the correct common status models.

Use mocked SSH connections.

No physical router should be required for the provider test suite.
12. Add Provider Detection Tests

Test the detection layer independently.

Cases should include:

    OpenWrt detected correctly.
    DD-WRT detected correctly.
    Netgear firmware detected correctly.
    Unknown firmware handled correctly.
    Detection failure handled safely.

The tests should ensure that adding a new provider does not alter existing provider behavior.
13. Add DD-WRT Support

After OpenWrt is stable, implement:

firmware_status_providers/ddwrt.py

DD-WRT should translate its own command/output conventions into the existing common models.

No DD-WRT-specific concepts should leak into the status models unless they represent information useful to all supported firmware.
14. Add Native Netgear Firmware Support

Implement:

firmware_status_providers/netgear.py

This provider represents routers running manufacturer firmware rather than OpenWrt-derived firmware.

The provider should use whatever supported management mechanism is available on the particular firmware.

The architecture must allow a provider to report that a particular capability is unsupported rather than forcing every firmware to provide identical functionality.

This establishes the project's broader compatibility goal:

OpenWrt
DD-WRT
Netgear
Other supported firmware
        │
        ▼
Common Management Interface

15. Establish Capability Reporting

Different firmware will not expose identical functionality.

Introduce a capability concept so the UI can determine what is supported.

For example:

Capabilities
├── status
├── memory
├── storage
├── temperature
├── network
├── interfaces
├── firewall
├── wireless
├── configuration
└── terminal

The initial implementation only needs the capabilities required by the current status functionality.

This prevents the GUI from assuming that every router can perform every operation.
16. Prepare for Multiple GUI Layouts

The provider architecture must remain independent of presentation.

The same:

SystemStatus
MemoryStatus

objects should be usable by different interface layouts.

Possible future themes include:

    OpenWrt-style
    DD-WRT-style
    Netgear-style
    Generic modern dashboard
    Compact/mobile layout

The provider supplies the data.

The UI decides how that data is presented.
17. Preserve the Initial Connection Page

The current welcome page should remain the initial connection workflow for now.

Its eventual role is:

Unknown Router
      │
      ▼
Initial Connection
      │
      ▼
Provision / Identify
      │
      ▼
Known Router
      │
      ▼
Status Dashboard

Once the router is known and its state is available, normal navigation should bypass the initial connection page.

No redesign of this page is required during the provider implementation phase.
18. Keep the Folder Structure Deliberately Small

The provider architecture should not result in a large hierarchy of tiny files.

The intended structure is approximately:

src/router_controller/
└── router_comms/
    ├── firmware_status_providers/
    │   ├── __init__.py
    │   ├── base.py
    │   ├── openwrt.py
    │   ├── ddwrt.py
    │   └── netgear.py
    │
    ├── router/
    ├── ssh/
    ├── discovery/
    ├── provisioner.py
    └── status_service.py

Firmware-specific code belongs inside firmware_status_providers.

Generic router communication remains outside that directory.
19. Maintain the Existing Installation Model

The project remains a system-installed Raspberry Pi application.

The development architecture should not introduce a requirement for users to manually configure Python environments simply to operate the installed application.

The package metadata, Debian packaging, systemd service, and executable entry point remain the mechanisms for deploying the application.

The test environment may continue using the project's test dependencies independently.
20. Testing Gate for This Development Phase

Every implementation increment should maintain the existing test suite.

The acceptance target is:

pytest
→ all existing tests pass
→ all new provider tests pass
→ no unrelated regressions

Provider-specific tests should be added alongside each provider rather than postponing testing until the end of the phase.
Development Order

The recommended implementation sequence is:

    Provider base interface
    OpenWrt provider
    Provider detection
    Provider registry
    Router/provider integration
    Status service
    Status page integration
    Status/error handling
    OpenWrt provider test suite
    Provider detection/registry tests
    DD-WRT provider
    DD-WRT tests
    Netgear provider
    Netgear tests
    Capability reporting
    GUI layout abstraction preparation

The immediate next task is therefore not another GUI feature. It is establishing the provider interface and implementing the OpenWrt status provider against the existing SSH connection and SystemStatus/MemoryStatus models. That gives the project a stable backend contract before additional firmware implementations are added. 